---
layout: post
title: Linux kernel Use-After-Free (CVE-2021-23134) exploitation.
use_math: true
---

## The bug
The bug is a Use After Free (UAF) in the Near-Field-Communication (NFC) subsystem of the Linux kernel (before v5.12.4).

Let $S_i$ be a socket constructed with:

`socket(AF_NFC, SOCK_STREAM, NFC_SOCKPROTO_LLCP)`

Then suppose we bind $S_i$ to an address $A$.
$S_i$ will be loaded with a pointer to an object $L$ of type: `nfc_llcp_local`
However, if the bind fails for $S_i$ then $L$ will be freed while $S_i \to L$ remains defined. So a future computation which dereferences $S_i \to L$ will transition the kernel into a weird state.

The patch removes the pointer $S_i \to L$ when $L$ is freed on bind failure. [Further information on the bug](https://www.openwall.com/lists/oss-security/2021/05/11/4 "See the openwall submission for more details.")

## Terms
### `io_uring`
Input/Output (I/O) can be performed synchronously or asynchronously. With the former, when we request an I/O operation we wait for its completion before continuining other work. With the latter, we may perform other tasks in the meantime. Let's say that asynchronous I/O is a superset of synchronous I/O.

The io_uring mechanism implements asynchronous I/O. Upon setting up an io_uring instance we get two related ring buffers: one for submissions and one for completions. Each submission is a request to the kernel to carry out an I/O operation. The completions are objects which return the status and data from an I/O request. We retrieve an object from the submission queue entries array, initialise it with an opcode and related data, and then issue the system call `io_uring_enter` to submit.

We can also setup the io_uring instance with the flag `IORING_SETUP_SQPOLL` which enables an internal kernel thread to poll the submission queue for new submissions. This prevents system call overhead by ensuring there is always a kernel thread waiting to carry out requests. We will take advantage of this as this kernel thread loads its credentials from an object in the kernel heap.

[LWN article](https://lwn.net/Articles/776703/)

### `userfaultfd`
A system call which enables a user to create a file descriptor for handling page faults in user space. [manpage](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/userfaultfd.2.html)
We use this system call extensively to manage the kernel heap.

### `msgsnd` and `msgrcv`
System calls which enable IPC along message queues. [manpage](https://linux.die.net/man/2/msgsnd)

## Exploitation
### Assumptions
sysctl knob `vm.unprivileged_userfaultfd=1`
and capability `CAP_NET_RAW` by default or through user namespaces.

### Strategy overview
The strategy is to leak and overwrite an object $R$ of type `io_ring_ctx`. By doing this, we can control the `sq_creds` field of $R$. Note that $R$’s type is chosen because objects of $R$’s and $L$’s types are similarly issued from kmalloc-2k.

$R \to$ `sq_creds` replaces the current credentials of the submission queue poller (SQP) thread when it performs an io_uring request. If `sq_creds` points to a `struct cred` object $C$ such that $C$ has uid, gid, and so on set to $0$, then the SQP thread will perform I/O requests as if the invoking user were root.

We can therefore read or write files on disk as an unprivileged user by issuing requests to the io_uring instance (managed by our controlled $R$). The demonstration here just reads out /etc/shadow. But to attain root privileges, simply edit /etc/passwd to enter a root shell.

### Components
We use the following components and techniques:

1. three NFC sockets: $S_1$, $S_2$, and $S_3$.
2. six threads: main, $X$, $Y$, $Z$, $T$, and $H$. 
3. `msgsnd` + `msgrcv` for leaking $R$. 
4. `userfaultfd` + `setxattr` for writing to $R$ and for ensuring that $R$ is not reallocated by another thread during and after exploitation.

### Background and conventions
With three NFC sockets, we are able to free $L$ three times. However, after each free, we need to overwrite some portion of $L$, which we call the local header, to ensure that the subsequent free will not cause a crash. Specifically, we write to set the refcount to $1$ so that the next free will not set the refcount to $-1$, raising a warning or crashing the process. Additionally, we ensure the first `list_head` field of $L$ is well defined.

With threads $X$, $Y$, $Z$ we coordinate: allocating $L$ again, holding $L$ in memory, reading from $L$ and writing to $L$. After a certain point, $L$ is denoted by $R$ as we reallocate the same object which was once used for $S_i \to L$ as $R$. The aim is to show that $L \equiv R$ through our exploit logic.

The `setxattr` technique is well known. It allows the user to allocate a `kvalue` object whose size and contents the user determines. It allows us to write from the beginning of the kernel object. However, after we finish writing to `kvalue` from userspace, `kvalue` is freed. 

The `msgsnd` + `msgrcv` technique is also known. As a recap: `msgsnd` allocates a `msg_msg` object which acts as a header followed by a message text whose length and contents the user determines. The `msg_msg` object fields should remain well defined if we want `msgrcv` to work correctly. Hence, we can't write from the beginning of the kernel object. On the other hand, `msgrcv` copies out the message text to userspace and then frees the `msg_msg` object. The user determines the length of the message text as well as when the `msg_msg` is received and freed. 

We use `userfaultfd` to pause a thread while in the kernel context via `setxattr`. This technique is documented here: https://duasynt.com/blog/linux-kernel-heap-spray. We use two variants of the technique. One issues a page fault when reading at a userspace address. The other issues a page fault when writing at a userspace address. These correspond to `copy_from_user` and `copy_to_user`, respectively. The former is associated with `setxattr` and the latter with `msgrcv`. 

Finally, a note on conventions. In the next section “unblocking thread $X$” usually means handling the page fault caused by thread $X$ while in the kernel context. A thread cannot handle its own page fault, but delegates this to a thread further up in the hierarchy. Though, not necessarily the next one up i.e. thread $Z$ unblocks thread main and thread $Y$ while thread $Y$ unblocks thread $X$. 

If we are dealing with a `setxattr` page fault, then to “handle the page fault” means we provide a new buffer to the `userfaultfd` subsystem with an ioctl. This then allows the write to `kvalue` ($L$) to continue, afterwards freeing `kvalue` ($L$). Similarly, with the `msgrcv` page fault we unprotect the buffer and continue reading. The reader is advised to look over Vitaly Nikolenko’s explanation linked above. This will explain what we mean when we say “page fault at a certain offset” in the next section.

### Method description
First, we close $S_1$, freeing $L$. We then allocate $3$ msgsnd buffers which discard additional allocations. Now that $L$ is free, we can reallocate it using `setxattr`. The value which we pass to `setxattr` is memory protected such that reading at a certain offset will result in a page fault. With `userfaultfd` we register the corresponding range so that thread $X$ can catch the page fault. The offset is the size of our own defined header for $L$’s type. We need to overwrite the header of $L$ so that freeing it again (when we close $S_2$) will not result in an early crash. This header just includes a `list_head` and a refcount field, whose counter value we set to $1$.

Second, from thread $X$, we catch the page fault issued in `setxattr` from the main thread. Now we do the same as in the main thread with the difference: we register a new range for a new value, we want the thread $Y$ to catch the next page fault, and the offset at which the page fault occurs is the size of `struct msg_msg` $+ 8$. We still overwrite $L$ with our header.

Third, from thread $Y$, we catch the previous page fault issued in `setxattr` as performed by $X$. 
However, this time after we close $S_3$, freeing $L$ for the third time, we allocate $L$ again through msgsnd. We then create a write protected buffer and register it with `userfaultfd`, our userspace receiver `msg_msg` sits at a negative offset from the write protected buffer. We pass the address of our `msg_msg` object to `msgrcv`. When `msgrcv`, specifically `store_msg`, writes to an offset from `msg_msg`, another page fault will be issued. This offset is determined by the size of the `struct msg_msg` header. 

At this point, main is paused to hold $L$ in place. We later unblock main by handling the page fault issued from `setxattr` in main - this will free $L$ to be reallocated as $R$. Additionally, $Y$ is paused to hold $L$ in place. $Y$’s continuation would leak the data in $L$ (at that point, $R$) to userspace, and then $Y$ would continue thread $X$ by resolving the `setxattr` page fault issued from $X$. Finally, $X$ is paused and will continue writing to $L$ ($R$) when $Y$ resolves $X$'s page fault.

Fourth, from thread $Z$, we catch the page fault issued in `msgrcv` as performed by $Y$.  
Now $X$ unblocks main by handling its page fault. This continues the `setxattr` write over $L$ and subsequently frees $L$ for the fourth time. We then allocate an `io_ring_ctx` object through the `io_uring_setup` system call and so $L \equiv R$. Finally, $Z$ attempts to acquire a lock which, if successful, would lead it to create a new thread $T$ allocating $R$ again with `setxattr`. However, at this point, thread $Y$ holds the lock and so $Z$ is paused attempting to acquire it.

The three major phases of this exploit begin here.

Fifth, $Z$ unblocks thread $Y$ by handling the write protected page fault. This first copies out $R$ to userspace. But by doing this, it also frees $R$. So, we relinquish the above lock ensuring that $Z$ continues. When $Z$ continues, it uses `setxattr` with a value which when read results in a page fault at the first byte. We thread $T$ catches this page fault and doesn't handle it. So, $R$ is not available to another thread for reallocation and potential corruption.

After we have $R$’s data, we locate the current $R \to$ `sq_creds` in our userspace buffer at offset $78$ (with scale factor `sizeof(uint64)`). After reading the leaked `sq_creds`, we subtract $176$ from it. The intention is to make $R \to$ `sq_creds` point “behind” the current `struct cred` object. We then write the new value back into our userspace buffer. Finally, we unblock thread $X$ by handling the page fault issued from `setxattr`. This writes our userspace buffer to $R$, maintaining all fields except `sq_creds` which we have manipulated. But by doing this, we also free $R$. So we use `setxattr` again and catch the page fault in $H$, in the same way as in $T$.

Finally, from thread $T$ we obtain a file descriptor for the directory “/etc/” using `open` directly. Then we issue an `openat` request to the `io_uring` instance. After retrieving the completion queue entry, we have a file descriptor for “/etc/shadow”. We then issue a read request which copies the contents of “/etc/shadow” into a userspace buffer. 
